Jack Andrews and his wife no longer enjoy what they call date night, their once-a-month outing to the movies and a steak dinner at Logan’s Roadhouse in Augusta, Ga.
In Harlem, Eddie Phillips’s life insurance payment will have to wait a few more weeks.
And Jessica Price is buying cheaper food near her home in Orlando, Fla., even though she worries it may not be as healthy.
Like millions of other Americans, they are feeling the bite from the payroll taxes that took effect at the beginning of January.
A Cato Institute examination of 20 school choice programs found there is no statistical difference in the level of regulation between a private school accepting scholarship students and a private school that declines to participate in a choice program.
Moreover, "curriculum mandates, admission policies, price controls ... or barriers to using scholarships to attend religious schools are rare for tax-credit scholarship programs," according to research from the Friedman Foundation for Educational Choice.
But that reality doesn't stop the demagoguery.
Also, participation in a tax-credit scholarship program is 100 percent voluntary for private schools.
Officials say the alternative SPM will not replace the official poverty measure, nor will it be used to calculate eligibility in programs.
Instead, it will indicate what happens to households when non-cash income (such as assistance for food, utilities and housing) is included, and certain expenses and taxes are deducted, said Mr. Johnson.
“No one knows” yet what the SPM will indicate, Rebecca Blank, Commerce Department undersecretary for economic affairs, said.
Jarrett decided on an asset-based approach when she studied the coping strategies of poor but resilient African-American families living in Chicago.
She shared her findings during the Poverty Summit: Understanding Poverty in Iowa and the U.S. on Monday at the University of Northern Iowa.
The UNI graduate department in Public Policy sponsored the all-day conference.
While some research makes conclusions from statistics, Jarrett's research relied on interviews and participant observations.
In his Kansas speech on the economy this month, President Obama described the growing inequality as the "defining issue of our time."
He urged America to avoid a race to the bottom and instead to create good, well-paying jobs.
The president laid out a series of important steps to restore fairness by repairing the tax system, but these strategies are not enough.
“Equal access to education is a keystone of democracy,” said Senator Martin Malavé Dilan.
“Not including funding for the Dream Act in the State Budget is a disservice to thousands of New Yorkers who wish to realize the American Dream and work to ensure that future generations can and will have long and prosperous lives.”
“Including the DREAM Act in this budget would have indicated that New York is still a place that values hard work, a place that is willing to make a smart investment in aiding its middle class and improving its economic future,” said Senator Jose Peralta.
“Its exclusion means telling thousands of young New York immigrants that, although they have done nothing wrong, all their hopes, dreams and hard work are less important than passing a tax credit making it profitable for Wal-Mart to fire a 25-year-old single-mom and replace her with a teenager.
The DREAM Act belonged in this budget, but we will not stop fighting until every young New Yorker has the opportunity to succeed.”
President Barack Obama promised to take the nation's high school graduation rate to 90 percent by the year 2020, up from 78 percent, to make the U.S. No. 1 in the share of its population who are college graduates, and to keep tuition bills inexpensive.
"So let me warn colleges and universities: If you can't stop tuition from increasing, the funding you get from taxpayers will decrease.
Higher education can't be a luxury; it is an economic imperative that every family in America should be able to afford."
The analysis found that the federal estate tax violates basic principles of a good tax system, especially fairness and efficiency.
Some defenders claim the tax affects only the "rich" and therefore reduces income inequality.
In reality, this unegalitarian system adversely affects countless family businesses that are critical to the economy.
An estimated 28 percent of family firms subjected to the estate tax are either sold or discontinued.
I had the opportunity to present the results of a new Demos study at the event.
In “How Our Tax Dollars Are Funding Low-Wage Work and Fueling Inequality,” my colleague Robert Hiltonsmith and I found that nearly two million private sector workers employed by government contractors, paid by federal health care spending, supported by Small Business Administration loans, working on federal construction grants, and maintaining buildings leased by the federal government earn $12 an hour or less (in some cases, much less).
We the taxpayers are funding a low-wage economy along the same lines as notorious employers like Wal-Mart and McDonalds, whose workers are also standing up for better treatment.
A little pocket of Los Angeles County tucked into the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains reflects a crucial facet of suburban life.
There’s tiny, wealthy Bradbury, a town that prides itself on having one of the richest ZIP codes in Los Angeles, where a house is on the market for $68.8 million.
A couple of miles to the east is Azusa.
This modest suburb is more than two-thirds Latino, a town of working families whose incomes and home values are a sliver of the wealth nearby.
These towns represent extremes of social inequality, but in Los Angeles and other areas, they reflect a defining pattern of contemporary suburban life.
"They're dealing with social dysfunction, violence in the family, potential drug addiction, poor education," she said.
The governor needs to remember that as he negotiates his new budget with the legislature.
If he does, he will improve basic services for the poor and invest in better programs that actually help people break out of poverty.
Both sides of the modern debate have neglected the economic problem: the scourge of increasing inequality.
When all of the economic gains go to the rich, the rest of the population doesn't have enough purchasing power.
We should have learned this after 1928, when the rich 1 percent got more than 23 percent of total income.
In this week’s magazine story about poverty in the U.S., I briefly mention that the way we typically count the poor is not ideal.
The official U.S. poverty classification dates back to the 1960s, when Mollie Orshansky, an economist at the Social Security Administration, created a measure based on how much money a family had to spend on food in order to eat nutritiously.
For the past 40 years, a lot has changed with how families use money—as well as with social scientists’ ability to measure it— and since the mid-1990s, the National Academy of Sciences has been recommending that the U.S. change how it measures poverty.
Neither G.E. nor Mr. Romney has, to my knowledge, disobeyed any tax laws, but the sparse taxes they’ve paid violate most Americans’ basic sense of fairness.
In looking at such statistics, one has to be careful: they typically show taxes as a percentage of reported income.
And the tax laws don’t require the reporting of all kinds of income.
We are still talking about this despite decades of clucking about the crisis in American education and numerous tries at school reform.
Whatever we’ve been doing in our schools, it hasn’t reduced educational inequality between children from richer and poorer families.
Part of knowing what we should do about this is understanding how and why these educational disparities are growing.
For the past few years, alongside other scholars, I have been digging into historical data to understand just that.
The results of this research don’t always match received wisdom or playground folklore.
Considering money itself, Dorr happily doesn’t hide from the fact that the rich through patronage of physicians and scientists made great strides in medicine possible.
Katherine as mentioned used her significant funds to support doctors seeking lifesaving cures, as did her physician sons.
Dorr also writes of Nathan Strauss, a department store owner who forced the pasteurization of milk.
This was touched on earlier, but when government policy favors fleecing the rich, it’s the non-rich who suffer the most.
Yes, the financial industry and giant corporations are awash in wealth, but they are not hiring more workers, they are not paying better pay, they are not enhancing benefits, they are not sharing the profits.
On the contrary, the typical American is working much harder for worse compensation.
He or she is paying a bigger share of the healthcare bill and has no pension plan waiting at the end of the line.
This is an all-American crisis bigger than the deficit or the war on terrorism, but no one seems ready to take it on.
During a June 2012 press conference President Obama said, “The truth of the matter is that, as I said, we’ve created 4.3 million jobs over the last 27 months; over 800,000 just this year alone.
The private sector is doing fine.”
In Barack Obama’s worldview, taxes are used to equalize wealth.
The 4.3 million private jobs created were the result of government not individual initiative, in his mind.
Obama told Joe the Plumber in 2008 that it’s fair to tax any income over $250,000 at 39 percent and that when you “spread the wealth around; it’s good for everybody.”
If the politicians don’t stop us, we will over time expand charter schools until every family that wants this option can have it.
But this can’t happen overnight — and the politicians have figured that, in the interim, parents can be manipulated.
These politicians are telling parents with children in failing district schools not only that it’s unfair but also that charters are causing their schools to fail.
For example, Bill de Blasio has charged that district schools are harmed when they share excess space in their buildings with charters.
He’s never presented any evidence for this claim — he can’t, because none exists.
Indeed, 22 empirical studies have shown that when private school choice is introduced into a community, neighborhood public schools actually experience academic gains.
Decades ago, before private school choice programs existed, there was uncertainty about how school choice would impact students.
Today, thanks to the experiences of 21 states, we know school choice benefits students and schools.
It also saves taxpayers money.
Protecting some American workers can mean impoverishing some overseas workers.
And indeed, gains overseas in the form of decreased poverty seem greater than the losses in the U.S., which appear mainly in the form of decreased incomes.
The issue raises the question of the morality of preferring the neighbor whom you know to the neighbor whom you do not know.
Globalization offers someone overseas a chance out of grinding poverty, while moving someone domestically into struggle and stagnation.
“There are simple things you can adjust, which suggest that rich people are fairly sensitive and just need little reminders.”
He notes that billionaire Warren Buffett made a similar point in a New York Times op-ed last year, calling for higher taxes on the wealthiest.
“I know well many of the mega-rich and, by and large, they are very decent people,” Buffett wrote.
“Most wouldn’t mind being told to pay more in taxes as well, particularly when so many of their fellow citizens are truly suffering.”
It is important that experts who have firsthand knowledge of and intimate experience with the circumstances and problems faced by the poor are included.
Then, the findings should be vetted, relatively quickly, by a blue-ribbon bipartisan committee made up of acknowledged leaders from business, government and the nonprofit sector.
The goal of the conference, patterned after the White House Conference on Civil Rights and the ongoing White House Conference on Aging, should be nothing short of developing bold plans that address the doomsday outcome that Smiley and West set forth.
“As hard as it is for us to accept, with the rich getting richer, the poor getting poorer, and there is very little reason not to believe that America could one day falter under the weight of poverty.”
This affects all of us.
When our tax dollars underwrite bad jobs, the economy as a whole is weakened and all of us are negatively affected.
There are other consequences as low-paid workers and their families have little money to spend, hindering economic growth that could be creating more jobs.
Poorly-paid workers also contribute less in taxes and are more likely to rely on public benefits to care for their families.
In contrast, we would all benefit from a different type of economy: an economy where working people can earn good wages and support their families.
“There is something going on,” said Chris G. Christopher Jr., senior principal economist at IHS Global Insight.
“The payroll tax seems to be cutting into things.”
That pattern was apparent in a survey of consumer sentiment released on Friday, according to Richard T. Curtin, who directs surveys of consumers at the university.
When asked how their financial situation had changed in January, 32 percent of people with incomes below $75,000 said their pay had decreased, compared with 13 percent who said it had increased.
Lerner is a labor and community organizer who has spent more than three decades organizing hundreds of thousands of janitors, farm workers, garment workers and other low-wage workers into unions.
These efforts resulted in increased wages, first-time health benefits, paid sick days and other improvements on the job.
The architect of the historic Justice for Janitors campaign, he is currently working with unions and community groups across the country to break Wall Street’s anti-democratic grip on our politics and our economy.
Lerner lays out a powerful case about how Wall Street accountability can transform an economy that offers so few pathways out of poverty, and so many ways to keep people impoverished.
Roughly a third of all families headed by a single mother are poor today.
Racial economic inequality was even more dramatic in King’s day, but poverty is still frequently determined by race.
Over a quarter of black and Latino Americans are below the poverty line, compared with only about a tenth of whites.
In fact, schools are intentionally perpetuating a less equitable system.
Colleges actively recruit "full pay" students who can attend and will not need financial aid.
A 2011 survey by Inside Higher Ed found that about 35 percent of admissions directors at 4-year institutions, particularly public colleges, had increased their efforts to target "full pay" students.
Far from wanting to enroll more low-income students, colleges recruit more affluent ones who will pay full price to attend.
Economist Anthony Randazzo of the Reason Foundation wrote that QE "is fundamentally a regressive redistribution program that has been boosting wealth for those already engaged in the financial sector or those who already own homes, but passing little along to the rest of the economy.
It is a primary cause of income inequality."
Of course, some argue that the Fed has also increased housing values and the wealth of the rest of America.
So you have just finished preparing your income taxes, but did you understand the tax code?
If you said yes, you do not know what you do not know.
The U.S. tax code has become so long, complex, contradictory and devoid of common sense that no one can fully understand it - and this includes tax professionals and Internal Revenue Service (IRS) personnel.
Can honorable persons of good conscience harass, fine and even imprison their fellow citizens for an alleged violation of laws and regulations they themselves do not completely know?
But that is a topic for another column.
Sadly, many children, including those who ended up on waiting lists, are trapped in failing district schools.
It’s heart wrenching for these children’s parents to know that other kids are getting opportunities that are denied to their own.
And this leaves these parents subject to manipulation by conniving politicians.
It is no wonder that 80 percent of food service workers do not earn a livable wage; of the few that do earn a living wage, a large portion are white men who work at upscale restaurants.
This is the American Dream; this is American poverty; this is restaurant work.
These men and women are the 47 percent, who despite serving the 1 percent, with the rest of us, get little in return but grief, mistreatment, and disrespect.
First, making Harvard, MIT, and other university courses available for free or a small charge online may allow tens of thousands of students to access the words of Harvard faculty via their computers.
However, this alone will never solve inequality—after all, access to regular internet and free time to complete a course is itself a privilege, and the students who seek out and successfully complete courses through edX are likely those who already have the academic discipline engendered by formal education.
EdX does not challenge the structures of inequality and power that give people differential access to education based on race, gender, nationality, and class.
For generations, this has been an inclusive nation: our ancestors upon reaching Ellis Island and gazing at the Statue of Liberty were told that this country was different: "give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free" because here a better life was possible due to a commitment to morality and the middle class.
But no good story is worth its salt if its protagonist doesn't have to deal with adversity.
In 1971, Lewis Powell argued that business leaders should turn their financial power into political might to have their interests represented in Washington, spawning an era that has created a wealth chasm between the one percent and the 99 percent.
The point is not simply that rich and poor people live in different places through a kind of class sorting in the marketplace.
The places themselves help to influence wealth and poverty.
Because of this power of places to fix inequity over time, current patterns are likely to outlive their residents.
For now, she has no choice but to change her daily routine.
“I added it up — it’s about $75 a month,” Ms. Skipwith said.
“That’s not a lot for some people, but mine is the only paycheck.
I don’t have extra money coming in.”
Of course, taxes are going up on wealthier Americans, too, with an increase in marginal rates on income above $400,000 for individuals and increased taxes on capital gains and dividends.
In contrast, newly posted U.S. census data show that the gap between rich and poor Americans has increased dramatically.
Mark Mather, associate vice president of the Population Reference Bureau, commented, “Millions of people are stuck at home because they can’t find a job.
Poverty increased in a majority of states, and children have been hit especially hard.”
For students who need access to college as an economic stepping-stone to future employment, simultaneous changes in both the educational and labor market areas can increase the chances of successful reform.
Labor market policies to decrease college costs can range from creating more useful, high-quality public sector jobs, like childcare and eldercare services, to increasing the minimum wage or supporting workers' bargaining power.
Any and all of these policies will help decrease the natural inclination for colleges to compete with each other and thus return to the quality, accessible education they should be providing.
Poverty rates have skyrocketed among black Americans.
The calculus is straightforward.
Increasing poverty is related to lack of jobs.
The stimulus bill, the green jobs programs and the promised jobs from Obamacare all have failed.
It is not about George W. Bush, the Tea Party or the Republican Congress: Those programs were put in place when the Democrats controlled both sides of Capitol Hill and the White House.
Income inequality in developed economies continued to increase in the years following after the onset of the financial crisis and at a more rapid pace, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said Tuesday.
The Paris-based think tank said transfers from governments, such as payments to those who had lost their jobs, helped counter the effects on disposable incomes, where inequality rose less quickly.
However, it warned that the focus among many governments on reducing budget deficits and debts since 2010, the date to which the report covers, is likely to have reduced those transfer payments and placed more people at risk of sliding into poverty.
Getting furloughed -- that is, forced to take unpaid time off -- for a couple of days in a single year would constitute a transitory income change, while getting a pay increase would constitute a permanent income change, Heim said.
The study found that most of the recent increase in income inequality is due to "permanent" income changes.
But the study is not implying that anyone is condemned to poverty if they're poor.
Economists were gratified to see that the net worth of Americans is very nearly back — less of a tenth of 1 percent — to where it was before the 2007 crash.
At the end of that year and at the end of 2012, net national wealth was just over $66.1 trillion.
The increasing stock and housing markets are the primary reasons, but so is the decline in debt, which has decreased $822 billion since 2007.
This generally good news, however, masks the fact that the benefits of rising wealth have not been equally shared.
Private schools have been serving Texas families very well for decades.
But now that state lawmakers are discussing ways to increase access to those schools for low- and middle-income families, myths about private education are being raised.
Such falsehoods mustn't interfere with giving students the educational opportunities they deserve.
Tax-credit scholarship legislation introduced by Sens. Dan Patrick, R-Houston, and R-McKinney, and Rep. Bill Callegari, R-Houston, would allow Texas businesses to tax credits for donating to nonprofits that, in turn, award private school scholarships.
Such a program currently is operating in 11 states, serving more than 151,000 children.
Some conservatives are concerned tax-credit scholarships would open Texas private schools up to state meddling and increased government regulations.
Opponents from the left contend private schools are not accountable and should not receive any state incentive to serve Texas families.
Our tax system relies on voluntary compliance.
But if citizens believe that the tax system is unfair, this voluntary compliance will not be forthcoming.
More generally, government is important not just in maintaining civil society, but in making investments in infrastructure, technology, education and health.
That consumer spending would add enough revenue to states to help 6,000 families get the child care subsidies they need to go to work.
That would be a win-win for the working class – and it wouldn’t cost taxpayers one cent!
Many profitable employers argue that taxes will kill jobs and diminish our state’s competitive edge.
There’s no evidence to support that.
What works are investments that assist the middle class.
Tax rates on the top 1 percent of taxpayers have fallen over the same period.
Such a change to the income distribution was unlikely to go unnoticed, and indeed, surveys show that Americans are generally knowledgeable about the increase in income inequality.
Using survey data from 2002, the political scientist Larry M. Bartels showed that three-quarters of Americans believed inequality has increased over the previous two decades.
The majority of those respondents said this trend was a “bad thing.”
Families who moved to less poor neighborhoods generally saw improvements in mental health and feelings of safety but made few gains in income and employment.
Kids did no better in school, and while girls tended to be better off socially, boys were more likely to show behavioral problems.
One of the conclusions of Moving to Opportunity and similar programs has been that a neighborhood is largely the product of its residents' social connections, and while the networks of poor communities may at times hinder escape from poverty, they also often provide a key source of support.
Online businesses will have to charge taxes to satisfy the rules of 50 states and hundreds of thousands of other smaller taxing jurisdictions.
There is no way they can adhere to all those tax rules, charge them accurately and deliver the money to all of the taxing authorities without a significant cost in man hours or money.
When you have thousands of employees, hiring a department of tax accountants is a manageable expense.
In the 50 years since the civil rights movement and Dr. King's dream, one problem (racism) has been replaced or at least matched by another -- poverty.
Urban poverty, rural poverty, and poverty that hits blacks, whites, browns and others alike.
As I have said previously in the Huffington Post, poverty is the new racism.
If you are poor, everything pretty much sucks.
Finally, everyone needs to contribute before expecting to receive.
The belief that one can collect benefits while making other people pay for them turns politics into a process of systematic unfairness.
Yet half of American households either don’t file income tax returns or file but owe nothing, often through refundable tax credits.
The possibility of voting benefits for oneself while someone else has to pay for those benefits is an ever more dangerous temptation.
While statistics reveal that access to and education in and around this technology greatly benefits students, recent studies reveal that there are striking differences in access to the latest digital technologies between lower and higher income students with teachers of the lowest income students dealing with the most challenges in bringing digital tools to their classrooms.
This coupled with a continued failure to provide minority students in low-income areas with access to a greater variety of core classes in science and technology has added to learning and achievement inequality.
While the access and education around these core disciplines is lacking, the long-term implications and potential for success are clear.
Income inequality increased during the first two years of the economic recovery, as the richest 7 percent of American households was the only group to experience an increase in their net worth.
“Inequality is as dear to the American heart as liberty itself,” William Dean Howells once observed.
But this quaint aphorism notwithstanding, the latest report on wealth polarization in the US may be difficult for many Americans to accept.
What we do with our income determines the savings we accumulate.
People with greater incomes tend to use their income to make investments and build their wealth.
People without lucrative employment do not have that luxury and tend to consume most of their income.
Last year a CNN poll found that 48 percent of Americans believed their present tax burden was about right, compared to 50 percent who considered it to be too much.
One wonders what the first group would think if they had to pay $845 billion more in taxes.
They don’t because the Federal Reserve is “buying” debt issued by the Treasury Department, but spending $845 billion that we don’t have means we eventually will have to pay $845 billion more, plus interest, in taxes.
Poverty is spreading at record levels across many groups, from underemployed workers and suburban families to the poorest poor.
More discouraged workers are giving up on the job market, leaving them vulnerable as unemployment aid begins to run out.
Suburbs are seeing increases in poverty, including in such political battlegrounds as Colorado, Florida and Nevada, where voters are coping with a new norm of living hand to mouth.
Those who are poor try to isolate the family unit from crime and street life, emphasize collective responsibility, value respectable behavior, avoid criminal activity and emphasize respect for the mother's role.
Economist Heidi Shierholz of the Economic Policy Institute in Washington, D.C., talked about the idea of systemic poverty in regard to economic inequality and labor economics.
At Monday's meeting, she questioned why a significant decrease in poverty rates failed to coincide with increased national productivity and gross domestic product.
Nowadays, if we hear the word “poor,” it is with the adjective “new” in front of it.
Vicki B. Escarra, former president and CEO of Feeding America, our nation’s network of food banks, recently indicated that there are now approximately 50 million Americans who are hungry and who do not know where their next meal will come from.
She speculated that part of the increase comes from the “new poor” – middle-class Americans unexpectedly shoved into poverty due to the recession.
By contrast, it is unpleasant to spend one’s days fine-tuning dishonest and deceptive practices that take money from the poor, as was common in the financial sector before the 2007-2008 financial crisis.
I believe that a vast majority of Americans would, all things being equal, choose the former over the latter.
But our tax system tilts the field.
It increases the net returns from engaging in some of these intrinsically distasteful activities, and it has helped us become a rent-seeking society.
And if you are undereducated or mired in poverty, you are almost certainly stuck where you are - and the same goes for your children.
This is not the country we like to think we are and it is not the country our political leaders are willing to admit they have helped create.
Thirty years of catering to Wall Street, big business and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce has not aided the American economy the way it was meant to do.
However, no household wealth data are available from the Census Bureau for the years between 2005 and 2009, so it is not possible to pinpoint when, or at what level, the peak in wealth per household occurred.
Looking at the period from 2005 to 2009, Census Bureau data show that mean net worth declined by 12% for households as a whole but remained unchanged for households with a net worth of $500,000 and over.
Households in that wealthiest category had a mean of $1,590,075 in wealth in 2005, $1,585,441 in 2009 and $1,920,956 in 2011.
For the new study, Kraus and his colleagues conducted three different experiments.
The first involved 200 university employees, some with college degrees and some without; the university setting is one in which educational attainment is particularly related to job status and can be used as a proxy for social class.
When asked to look at photographs of faces and identify the emotions portrayed, those with only a high school degree did better than their college-educated counterparts.
This measure of empathic accuracy — “a person’s ability to accurately understand emotions that other people are feeling,” says Kraus — is important because it is a major part of empathy itself: if you can’t recognize what someone else is experiencing, it’s hard to respond with kindness to their needs.
A few times a year, the United Way of Central Maryland implements a poverty simulator in which middle-class participants are given a set of tasks, along with situational constraints like relying on family for child care, taking the bus and depending on the money from a teenager's after-school job.
Some people grow so frustrated that they quit before the exercise is over.
Volatility also plays a major role in what might be called the chaos of poverty.
Over the course of a year, 20% of families in the poorest fifth will see their incomes drop by at least half from one four-month period to the next, according to Urban Institute research.
The most potent development over the past three decades is that the test scores of children from rich families have increased very rapidly.
Before 1980, affluent students had little advantage over middle-class students in academic performance; most of the socioeconomic disparity in academics was between the middle class and the poor.
But the rich now outperform the middle class by as much as the middle class outperform the poor.
Just as the incomes of the affluent have increased much more rapidly than those of the middle class over the last few decades, so, too, have most of the gains in educational success accrued to the children of the rich.
Now our challenge is to make sure that every child has a fair chance to succeed in life.”
A significant part of that promise is access to education choice – giving all families and children equal opportunity to choose a school that is best for them.
It’s a choice that wealthier parents have had.
Yet in cities like Detroit which has the worst public schools in the nation, Democratic lawmakers like John Conyers refused children the choice of charter schools – even as they sent their own children to elite private institutions like Cranbrook in Oakland County.
The goal is to better understand both who is poor and the success or failure of anti-poverty efforts.
The effects of many major programs—such as the earned-income tax credit—aren’t picked up in the traditional way of measuring poverty.
This Census Bureau report shows how the poverty picture changes under the new measure.
The headline finding is that overall poverty increases by 0.8 percentage points (a big reason it’s been tough to get an Administration to do this before now), but what’s more interesting to look at is how the distribution of income changes.
And, not surprisingly, the United States ranks 5th in the 2011 Financial Secrecy Index, behind the traditional tax havens of Switzerland, the Cayman Islands, Luxembourg, and Hong Kong.
In other words, as millions of Americans struggle to survive each and every day, the wealthiest Americans, the oligarchs, are accumulating vast sums of wealth, without anyone saying a word, or raising a finger.
Just look at Mitt Romney.
Rogoff goes on to argue, however, that technology may work in the future to reduce income inequality, especially in the field of education.
“Surely, higher education will eventually be hit by the same kind of sweeping wave of technology that has flattened the automobile and media industries, among others.
If the commoditization of education eventually extends to at least lower-level college courses, the effect on income inequality could be profound.”
Third, root out corporate welfare.
The U.S. tax code is honeycombed with unwarranted subsidies for businesses.
While many of these began as efforts to protect nascent industries or provide incentives for sectors that benefit the country as a whole, special interests have in many cases kept these exemptions in the code long past their useful life.
The Progressive Policy Institute has long called for charging an independent panel, modeled on the successful military-base-closing commission, with developing a subsidy hit list and submitting it to Congress for an up-or-down vote.
In Guilford County, within the past five years only 46 percent of low-income students passed end-of-grade tests (EOGs) compared to 80 percent of more affluent students, according to the state Department of Public Instruction.
These numbers illustrate the necessity for our low-income students to have additional educational options.
This measure is not to privatize public education but to provide students in desperate need the ability to attend schools that can meet their educational needs.
With 1.5 million students in our public schools, our traditional school system will continue to be the main education vehicle for North Carolina’s students.
While critics say opportunity scholarships are unconstitutional, a 2002 U.S. Supreme Court decision not only established the constitutionality of these programs, but they’ve been continuously upheld, including most recently in Indiana.
“The good news is that the key demographic factors that explain differences in household income are not fixed over our lifetimes, which means that individuals and households are not destined to remain in a single income quintile forever,” Perry writes.
“Fortunately, evidence shows that individuals and households change income quintiles over their lifetimes as the key demographic variables highlighted above change,” he adds.
In short, you’re not destined to be poor, you’re not destined to be rich, we’re not locked into these income brackets, and we certainly don’t need a politician stepping in to decide what’s “fair.”
As the Fed noted in a separate report, the federal tax code — which remains vaguely progressive — has been the one proven method to "mitigate income inequality."
But with congressional Republicans gradually flattening federal income-tax rates and with already-regressive state tax rates in GOP bastions like Texas, Wyoming, Tennessee, South Dakota and Mississippi, the tax system has lately been maintaining or worsening existing inequality.
The good news is that if we return to the slightly increased tax rates of the Reagan or Clinton eras — i.e., the rates that existed when the economy was doing better — we can begin fixing things.
If, though, we keep tax rates the same or make them even more regressive, we'll be seeing a whole lot more about economic inequality on our local news as the current crisis inevitably reaches an ugly boiling point.
“A huge chunk of the populace is not covered, even by Medicaid,” she said.
The political rhetoric during a presidential campaign focuses on the middle class and leaves the uninsured working poor largely invisible, said Rand Corp. researcher Dr. Art Kellermann.
“We hear a lot of talk about unemployment and the aspirations of middle-class Americans.
Forty years ago, the Supreme Court created an unmitigated disaster for our nation's school children when it ruled on the case of San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez.
The 5-4 decision allowed Texas to fund school districts on the basis of locally raised tax dollars, confining children in poor communities to underfunded schools.
It was a triumph of states' rights over human rights, holding that education was not a fundamental right under our Constitution and that citizens could not sue in federal court to when states underfund their schools.
This has led to decades of expensive, drawn-out litigation in most states on behalf of students, parents, and poor communities wanting better schools.
In an earlier study, Piff and his colleagues found that rich people were less likely to help a person who entered the lab in distress — except when they’d just watched a video about child poverty.
“We’re not arguing that rich people are bad at all, but that psychological features of wealth have these natural effects,” says Piff.
“There are simple things you can adjust, which suggests that rich people are fairly sensitive and just need little reminders.”
“Until now, the official line has been that what we need are incentives — that job creators won’t do their thing unless we dangle the carrot of immense wealth in front of them," said Krugman, who has been hawking his own latest book, “End This Depression NOW!”
"But now we’re supposed to think that it’s not the prospect of future wealth, but wealth in being, that’s what is really so wonderful.”
Income inequality has vexed many economists, especially with the increasing disparity in wages.
Although most African Americans are actually of diverse ancestry, defining who is black for legal purposes has not been very difficult.
Defining concepts like "working class" or "rural poor" and then assigning individuals to their appropriate class would be far more challenging.
And deciding exactly what extent of reverse discrimination each allegedly deprived social class is entitled to would be even worse.
"There are a lot of at-risk students that would not be able to go to college," said Chapman, "if they end this program."
Chapman's concern is that more rigorous standards will prevent at-risk students from going to college.
"People that can afford to go to school will be able to handle the standards," said Chapman.
"But at-risk students need that extra help, that extra lift."
For their part, four-year colleges should agree to accept community-college transfers for 5 percent of their junior class and should get public incentives to recruit poor students out of high school.
Four-year students will benefit from economic and racial diversity, and community-college students will benefit from the political capital and social networks provided by integrated student bodies.
These bold steps to bridge the higher-education divide will help colleges strengthen American competitiveness, bolster American democracy, and revive the American dream.
The middle classes also enjoyed a code of etiquette which governed behavior and morality.
The code was demanding and strict.
Hard work, self-discipline, and personal achievement were stressed.
Anyone who committed a crime, or worse, fell into poverty, was considered responsible for his misfortune.
If not the usual suspects, what’s going on?
It boils down to this: The academic gap is widening because rich students are increasingly entering kindergarten much better prepared to succeed in school than middle-class students.
This difference in preparation persists through elementary and high school.
More recently, former Senator John Edwards of North Carolina proposed increasing the tax rate for the top 35 percent in order to raise up to $120 billion to pay for his universal health care plan.
New Mexico Governor Bill Richardson may be the only exception among the Democratic candidates.
In his first term as governor, Mr. Richardson reduced income-tax rates across the spectrum, as Mr. Bush did, reducing the state’s top income-tax rate from 8.2 percent to 4.9 percent over five years.
The adverse developments in the labor market added to the difficulty most households were having in repaying their existing debts and in accessing credit in the recession.
These households that bore the strains in both housing and labor markets, and had little wealth cushion, had more difficulty making payments on their mortgages and other consumer credit debt.
For example, among the mortgages originated from 2004 to 2008, almost 25 percent of those in low-income neighborhoods were foreclosed on or in serious delinquency as of 2011, more than twice the rate of mortgages originated in higher-income neighborhoods.
The simple solution to this problem, to the extent there is one, would be to extend the tax net to some of those now living without federal income taxation.
But this is practically impossible because Republicans, who mainly complain about the large numbers of non-taxpayers, enacted most of the tax policies that removed them from the tax rolls.
These include the earned income tax credit and the refundable child credit.
There was no difference between opposing classes, as Marx had predicted, but economic specialization enabled society to produce more effectively and thereby created more new social groups than it destroyed.
There were a large group of subclasses between the very rich and the dirt poor.
Neither the middle classes nor the working class acted as a unified force.
Some wonder how the American ideal of equality of opportunity has eroded so much.
The way we finance higher education provides part of the answer.
Student debt has become an integral part of the story of American inequality.
Robust higher education was once the linchpin in a system that promised opportunity for dedicated students of any means.
We now have a pay-to-play, winner-take-all game where the wealthiest are assured a spot, and the rest are compelled to take a gamble on huge debts, with no guarantee of a payoff.
Clearly, income and therefore wealth is being absorbed by the richest 1% at a phenomenal rate.
As Reich pointed out, “the American economy was much larger in 2007 than it was 30 years before.”
However, inequality has increased so much that the real, functioning economy for the 99% – the one we all live and work in – is actually smaller, with less economic activity and real GDP than 30 years earlier.
That has big implications for current policy discussions.
First and foremost, yes, the rich should be paying more in taxes.
Second, the last thing policy-makers should be doing is hitting the middle class harder, either by increasing their taxes (which the chained CPI would do when applied to tax brackets) or reducing their benefits after they retire (which the chained CPI would do).
These same companies, however, use our public infrastructure—they hire workers trained in our schools, they depend on the U.S. court system to protect their property, and our military defends their assets around the world—yet they’re not paying their share of the bill.
Corporate tax dodging also negatively affects Main Street businesses that are forced to compete on an unlevel playing field.
“Small businesses are the lifeblood of local economies,” said Frank Knapp, Jr., president and CEO of the South Carolina Small Business Chamber of Commerce.
It is important to understand America’s wealth and income inequality as detailed in the video.
It is more important to understand the causes which include both the institution of supply side economics for the last thirty plus years, outsourcing of the American jobs, and bad tax policies.
It is essential that solutions are understood as absent correcting this problem, the systematic destruction of the middle class will continue.
OK, our friends on the left have one narrow statistic that says wealth inequality is soaring, but to be fair – this does not capture the distribution either.
So check out Marco Cagetti and Mariacristina De Nardi from the Chicago Federal Reserve.
They examine the entire distribution from 1989 to 2001 noting how uneven the distribution of income is.
The Helping One Person Excel, or HOPE scholarship, which has been helping hundreds of at risk and low-income students attend Edison State College since 1998, is being dissolved.
In response, the Lee County NAACP wrote a letter to the college saying they were "perplexed" by the decision.
Rebecca Finer is on her way to getting a degree in public relations at FGCU - something she says wouldn't have been possible if not for Edison's HOPE scholarship.
"There's not a lot of scholarships out there for low-income families," said Finer.
As you may have heard, the incomes of the rich have increased more in the last 30 years than the incomes of the poor.
Money helps families provide cognitive experiences for their young children because it provides better home environments, more time for parents to read to their children, access to better child care and preschool and — in places like New York City, where 4-year-old children take tests to determine acceptance into gifted and talented programs — access to preschool test preparation tutors or the time to be tutors themselves.
But income inequality explains, at best, half of the increase in the rich-poor academic achievement difference.
In regard to the problem of foreclosure and evictions the federal government is heavily responsible due to its failure to regulate the banks and to prosecute them for their fraudulent activities.
Attorney General Eric Holder announced earlier this year that the banks were too big to prosecute.
Five years ago the Congress and the ruling class were saying that the banks were too big to fail.
However, the people inside the U.S., particularly the oppressed African and Latino nations are being driven into poverty.
Neither political party is working as an advocate for these social elements within the population or the working and so-called middle classes as a whole.
Some states cut unemployment benefits that help keep families afloat in bad economic times.
Others reduce state earned income tax credits that increase income for the poorest families.
Many states also have decreased the kinds of investments that can help give children from disadvantaged families a better opportunity at a more prosperous future, such as improved access to preschool programs and higher education.
We know that poverty diminishes children’s success in school, and more recent evidence confirms that it can even dampen their earnings as adults.
The rising share of children growing up in poverty undermines the foundation of a strong economy and shared prosperity: our human capital.
But none of these efforts can bear fruit unless we squarely face what is not working in our economy.
The problems of the poor and near poor – children, seniors, people with disabilities, workers, and unemployed people – must not be ignored.
Political leaders of both parties must confront this problem, which requires bipartisan solutions.
We need a national discussion of poverty and low-wage work so that our nation's leaders can take real action to empower and improve the lives of millions living, struggling and cycling in and out of poverty; that's an act that would make America more virtuous and economically strong.
More specifically, we need to ensure every student and young person has the knowledge and skills he or she needs to participate in this new economy.
And not only participate, but excel.
We need people who can help solve the problems of our time--food shortages, access to education, climate change, income inequality, the global water crisis and so on.
In the richest nation on earth, it’s wrong for anyone who works full time to be poor.
Yet millions of Americans who work a 40-hour week are unable to lift their families out of poverty.
Imagine supporting your family on just $14,500 a year.
That’s what a full-time, minimum-wage job pays.
Wages come to less than $279 a week – and that’s before taxes.
A sales tax is inherently regressive.
It asks proportionately more from poor and middle-income Oregonians than from millionaires.
The editorial board's sales tax proposal springs from faulty logic and a misguided focus on per capita personal income.
Oregon's per capita personal income has been increasing, though it is less than the national average.
An individual can make the decision that working more hours in the day is not worth their time and thus they give up extra income that they would otherwise make and save to increase their wealth.
Other individuals choose not to invest and save at significant levels, which also affects their overall wealth.
Sometimes economic circumstances just prevent some individuals from being able to grow their wealth and that is a circumstance that will always occur.
Over time those in dire economic circumstances have increased their prospective wealth along with everyone else.
Higher education system graduates enjoy increased average incomes, increased financial security, and more job satisfaction, and are less likely to access the welfare system than those who do not complete higher education.
Public universities have a strong presence in advanced research, conducting $360 million in annual research and increasing their research volume at a speed that exceeds the national growth rate.
For every $1 in state funding, public universities receive an additional $2.24 in federal funding.
The average tax reductions for those making an average of $1 million a year is a little over $8,000.
That won’t create jobs; tax reductions for the wealthy will simply line the pockets of those who already have the most, as the wealthiest among us are the least likely to put those dollars back into the economy.
This poorly designed policy will benefit the wealthy at the expense of the state’s economy and the state’s poorest, including seniors.
A tax shift is not tax reform.
Some economists argue that these figures overstate inequality.
They point out that Saez and Piketty exclude income from Social Security and other government benefits from their calculations.
Most studies also don't count the value of health insurance and other employer benefits, which have increased in recent decades.
But the budget office's study does include the impact of taxes and government benefits.
Few economists dispute that income inequality has worsened in the past three decades.
On the second question, the issue is how do we enable individuals to get a variety of postsecondary skills—from community college to online education to four-year degrees?
I don’t think there’s any single strategy we should use.
But I do think we need to have a commitment to postsecondary education and access to that education for every American.
As such, there are a host of alternative plans floating around Washington besides the one centrists are hammering out.
Several Democrats continue to advocate for the repeal of the Bush tax reductions— which Obama’s signature in January made permanent — and imposition of a steeper tax on certain income levels.
Separate efforts to do the same in state legislatures from California to Maine to Missouri have passed, though some governors, including New Jersey’s Chris Christie, have vetoed these measures, arguing they will drive businesses out of state.
The different performance of financial asset and housing markets from 2009 to 2011 explains virtually all of the variances in the trajectories of wealth among affluent and less affluent households during this period.
Among households with net worth of $500,000 or more, 65% of their wealth comes from financial holdings, such as stocks, bonds and 401(k) accounts, and 17% comes from their home.
Among households with net worth of less than $500,000, just 33% of their wealth comes from financial assets and 50% comes from their home.
You work hard all year for your money and then comes April 15 and the tax bill.
If you’re lucky and have itemized deductions, you will get a refund, but taxes still sting, especially for the middle class that pays more than its fair share.
Lots of people, especially Republicans, have fallen for the line that the top one percent loves to promote: They pay their fair share; in fact, they pay more than they should and their taxes need to be reduced even further.
Writing in the May 1 issue of Time, Justin Fox said, “According to economists Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez, 75% of all income gains from 2002 to ‘06 went to the 1% of households making more than $382,600 a year.”
Noting with approval that “Obama in particular has been explicit about wanting to shift more of the income-tax liability onto those making more than $200,000 a year,” Fox blamed inequality on President Reagan’s tax reductions and cited a recent poll showing 51% favor “heavy taxes on the rich.”
Yet his figures, from Piketty and Saez, refer to income before taxes.
Consider just one example of the very real, positive effects of the non-cash safety program:  the creation of food stamps has helped eliminate the widespread child malnutrition across parts of the South and Appalachia that shocked the nation in the late 1960s.
Meanwhile, the role of cash assistance in fighting poverty has dwindled, due to large cuts in cash-aid benefit levels (in inflation-adjusted terms) since the 1970s, the conversion of federal cash public assistance to poor families into a block grant whose funding level has been frozen for 16 years without adjustment for inflation or (in recent years) large increases in unemployment, and many states’ elimination since the 1980s of much or all cash assistance for poor non-elderly adults who aren’t raising children.
In 1965, cash programs that are included in the official poverty measure — Unemployment Insurance, Aid to Families with Dependent Children (since converted into Temporary Assistance for Needy Families), Supplemental Security Income for the low-income elderly and people with disabilities, and state and local general assistance programs — comprised more than 90 percent of the benefits provided by major federal income-support programs for low-income and jobless Americans.
The Marketplace Fairness Act also has supporters and opponents both claiming the mantle of “states’ rights.”
Supporters say each state should have the right to collect taxes from commerce with its own residents, without being undermined by out-of-state shippers.
But opponents argue that any state attempting to force an out-of-state business to do its dirty work of tax collection violates another state’s right to regulate its own corporate residents and their commerce.
Undoubtedly, we must continue to improve our traditional public schools.
But with more than 360,000 low-income and working-class students statewide failing EOGs last year and the statewide EOG achievement gap range increasing to 30 percent, there is no debate regarding the demand for this measure when it comes to helping students who need the most help.
House Bill 944 (Opportunity Scholarship Act) is a lifesaver for the hundreds of thousands of poor children in our state who are dealing with academic failure with no other educational option.
“There is no economic recovery strategy stronger than committing to early childhood and K-through-12 investment.”
Think for a moment of poverty as a disease, decreasing the chances for growth and development, diminishing children’s chances for a healthy, happy futures they might otherwise expect.
In the exam room, we try to mitigate the pain and suffering that are its pernicious symptoms.
But our patients’ well-being depends on more, on public health measures and prevention that lift the darkness so all children can grow toward the light.
The rich spend proportionally less of their incomes than the non-rich do, and when a greater portion of the nation's overall wealth flows to those who will not use it for direct consumption, economic activity could decline.
If the rich spend a smaller percent of their incomes on consumption than others do, then presumably they save it.
And that saving translates into investment, which increases the capital stock.
Low-income individuals tend to live in cheap housing areas, which are usually accompanied with crime and health risks.
Now more than ever, we see the importance of this issue, because it will literally define a generation of American citizens.
The Great Recession has worsened the deep divide between the rich and poor.
Now more than ever, place matters.
It is even more sinister than that.
The owners of capital through the patent system can stymy the small entrepreneur attempting to innovate (e.g., the small software developer sued and dragged into court for a design some corporation claims they own a patent for).
The farmer cannot succeed if he must buy seeds because his fields are cross pollinated with genetically modified seeds that are owned by a corporation.
Politicians bribed by the wealthy class pass laws (regulations) that effectively protect businesses from competition (e.g., the hydrocarbon industry stymying the effort of alternative sources of energy through policy and deception).
Richer households had also taken on debt and were affected by declines in asset prices.
But these households entered the recession with a larger wealth buffer, so they generally were still able to service their debts.
The increase in defaults and delinquencies put extraordinary stress on most households' finances, intensified the financial crisis, and exacerbated the effect of the initial economic shocks.
While stereotypes suggest that poor people are more likely to lie and steal, new research finds that it’s actually the wealthy who tend to behave unethically.
In a series of experiments — involving everything from dangerous driving to lying in job negotiations and cheating to get a prize — researchers found that richer people behaved worse.
But, rather than class itself, the authors suggest that it’s opinions about greed that may largely explain the difference.
“With the richest 1% having all of the income gains and everyone else’s income decreasing it’s impossible that would not affect every part of the country," he says in the attached clip.
Blodget says growing poverty in the suburbs is “emblematic of a larger problem in this country, which is increasing inequality.”
One in three Americans were poor or near poor in 2010 [defined by twice the poverty level of $23,550 for a family of four], according to Brookings.
The economists Richard J. Murnane and Greg J. Duncan report that from 1972 to 2006 high-income families increased the amount they spent on enrichment activities for their children by 150 percent, while the spending of low-income families increased by 57 percent over the same time period.
Likewise, the amount of time parents spend with their children has increased twice as fast since 1975 among college-educated parents as it has among less-educated parents.
The economists Garey Ramey and Valerie A. Ramey of the University of California, San Diego, call this escalation of early childhood investment “the rug rat race,” a phrase that nicely captures the increasing perception that early childhood experiences are central to winning a lifelong educational and economic competition.
However, this alone will never be a social equalizer—after all, access to regular internet and free time to complete a course is itself a privilege, and the students who seek out and successfully complete courses through edX are likely those who already have the academic discipline engendered by formal education.
EdX does not challenge the systems that cause inequality and power and give people differential access to education because of race, gender, nationality, and class.
But more importantly, education by learning from prestigious faculty members is not necessarily democratic, or even beneficial to students.
