Every major American city today is a doughnut with wealthy suburbs surrounding a black hole of poverty relieved by mocking skyscraper islands.
Supposedly, we’re the wealthiest, the most influential country in the world, yet 1 in 4 children – I can’t stress that enough – will find themselves descending into the black hole of poverty.
In the Philippines context, critics argue that free market ideology and neoliberal policies have enriched the élites while sinking the poor into an ever-deepening black hole of poverty, hunger, and degradation.
If we continue to strive to fulfill old debt obligations, we run the risk of plunging the globe into a black hole of poverty and destitution.
Meanwhile, the rest of us swirl around the huge black hole of poverty and the momentum is becoming more irresistible for more people as they are drawn closer to economic oblivion.
Since the advent of the Great fucking Society in the 60's we have poured over 5 trillion dollars down the black hole of poverty programs that haven't worked.
So the goal should be to get people working, go to them, empower them, rather than to pump money into the black hole of poverty.
Sick and tired of watching good money thrown after bad into the black hole of poverty remediation.
Billions are spent on surveillance, law enforcement and war, while more and more of our fellow humans are sinking ever deeper into the black hole of poverty and despair.
All they care about is putting ALL of us in a deep dark hole so they don’t have to see us — whether that hole is a grave, or the black hole of poverty and marginalization.
And the recent setbacks in our economy, coupled with increasing costs for everything from gasoline to bread, will push these people even deeper into the black hole of poverty.
712,000 Americans fell into poverty in 2011, thanks to Barack Obama and Democrats.
Fiscal cliff: America goes to the brink, but millions already fell into poverty.
Another 1.1 million Americans fell into poverty last year, bringing the total to 37 million people living below the poverty line, defined as $19,307 for a family of four, the Census Bureau said in its 2004 income and poverty report.
It also looks at how many fell into poverty, how many climbed out of it and how many stayed poor during the period.
Children pushed into poverty by a recession, the report says, are three times more likely to be poor themselves than those who managed to stay more affluent.
Some who fall into poverty are able to bounce back, that is, in some cases the flow into poverty gets reversed, but many households that fell into poverty have remained persistently poor.
Another important element of support for whites came in the GI Bill, which effectively helped many families jump out of poverty for generations to come.
In fact, the World Bank is talking about 44 million people being dragged into poverty in the past year because of higher food prices.
Mr Orr added: 'In the vast majority of cases, people will simply not be able to make up the shortfall themselves and could end up being sucked into poverty and spiralling levels of debt.' 
It also looks at how many fell into poverty, how many climbed out of it and how many stayed poor during the period.
Need to Know examines a successful experimental program in Oakland, Calif., designed to help the working poor emerge from poverty.
The ability to crawl out of poverty remains an intractable situation for most of the working poor, and is a cycle repeated through generations.
It just goes to show you, it's possible to pull yourself out of poverty WITHOUT government assistance!
That's an EASY !!! The Dems believe that, if they help the Poor out of poverty, they wouldn't have ANYONE else left to support their socialist agendas !!!
I’m praying with the skills they have now they can jump out of poverty into a sustainable future
And when he was elected in 1974, it was the ultimate triumph over a lifetime of experiencing racism and discrimination firsthand, not to mention the black hole of poverty Castro had to pull himself out of as one of 12 children born to Mexican immigrants.
