; CONFLICT ONTOLOGY

;Conflict has two adversaries.
(B (name adversary1) (=> (conflict e :1.2) (adversary x y e)))

;Adversaries have degree of strength.
;   [Let's talk about how to represent this.]

;Adversaries have contradictory goals.
(B (name adversary2) (=> (adversary x y e :1.2) 
   	 	     	 (^ (goal g x) (goal h y) (not g h))))

; For a stronger adversarial relation, we may add that goals preclude each other
(B (name adversary3) (=> (adversary x y e :1.2) 
   	 	     	 (^ (goal g x) (goal h y) 
			    (=> (accomplish-goal e1 g)
			        (!accomplish-goal e2 h)))))



;To win is to achieve the goal.

;To lose is for your adversary to win.

;Adversaries attack each other.

;Adversaries use weapons in attacks.

;Weapons are aimed.

;Adversaries are targeted.


: ENGLISH LEXICAL AXIOMS FOR CONFLICT

;A fight is a conflict.

;Combat is conflict.

;Enemies are adversaries.

;Adversaries compete with each other.  

;Victory is winning.

;A barrage is an attack.

;A slap is an attack.

;A rifle is a weapon.

;A rifle has sights/crosshairs for aiming.

;To train a weapon is to aim a weapon.

;A bullet is a weapon.  

;To shoot a gun is an attack.


; WAR ONTOLOGY

;War is a conflict.

;Adversaries in war are groups to which members are loyal.

;A flank is a part of a group adversary that is not strong.

;A frontline is a part of a group adversary that attacks.

;Members of groups sometimes defect.

;Subgroups of groups sometimes revolt.

;Dresden was destroyed by an attack with bombs.  
;   [Maybe we'll ignore this.]


: ENGLISH LEXICAL AXIOMS FOR WAR

;A betrayal is when members of groups defect.


; SPORTS ONTOLOGY

;Sport is conflict constrained by rules of behavior.
;   [Let's talk about how to represent this.]

;Adversary in sport is a player.

;Players wear uniform identifying their team.

;In some sports, the adversaries are teams of persons.


; RACING  ONTOLOGY

;Racing is a sport.

;A marathon is a race.

;A race has stages.


; BOXING  ONTOLOGY

;Boxing is a sport.

;Blow is an attack in boxing.

;Low blow is blow against the rules.

;Adversaries are in same weight class.

;Heavyweight is the highest weight class.

;A round is a part of a boxing match.  


; WRESTLING ONTOLOGY

;Wrestling is a sport.


; CARD GAME ONTOLOGY

;A card game is a sport.

;A hand is a weapon in an attack.  
